hi everyone my name is mark evans i'm
author of the book unmasking narcissism
a guide to understanding the narcissist
in your life i'm also a licensed
psychologist in the states of california
in new york and i have a private
practice with a focus on treating and
writing about narcissism and related
disorders you can find a list of my
publications and more information about
me and my work on my website at
www.dreatonson.com
it's my hope that by the end of this
presentation you'll have a new
appreciation for narcissism as a mental
illness as opposed to the stigmatized
media representations with which we're
all familiar something that i call
popular narcissism
so let's get started
the public has a one-dimensional view of
narcissism that's been shaped over the
last 40 years by popular media
representations and by the dsm itself
and for those who may not be familiar
with the dsm that's the official manual
used by clinicians in the united states
to diagnose mental disorders the dsm is
currently in its fifth revision called
the dsm-5 published in 2013.
the popular understanding of narcissism
as a disorder of too much self-love goes
back at least 30 years
here's one study from 1991 where
researchers asked participants to think
about the three most narcissistic people
they know and then to describe everyday
actions that reflect that person's
narcissism
participants reported every day
narcissistic activities like looking in
the mirror bragging and putting other
people down
now for the most part their descriptions
corresponded to narcissistic themes like
exhibitionism grandiosity and
self-centeredness
basically the participants echoed what
we all probably think of when we think
about narcissists
where do we get these ideas
how do we know what we know about
narcissism
well those ideas are shaped by the media
which in turn is shaped by our
expectations it's a feedback loop
creating a commonly held picture of what
narcissism is
so to demonstrate here are a few
narcissists from popular movies and
television shows
see if they line up with your
understanding of what narcissism really
is the first is gaston from disney's
beauty and the beast
he's vain self-absorbed envious he's
grandiose aggressive manipulative and
morally hollow next is miranda priestly
from the devil wears prada she has low
empathy she's arrogant cruel judgmental
shallow and demeaning or devaluing to
other people around her gregory house
from the tv show house he has low
empathy he's grandiose demeaning and
arrogant
regina george from the movie mean girls
she's vain arrogant attention seeking
admiration seeking entitled and cruel
and finally the queen from disney's snow
white now for some reason disney is big
on narcissistic villains
she's vain envious entitled she needs
constant admiration and she's cruel
notice that almost all of these
characters are villains and it's not
just selection bias i could have pulled
in a number of other characters and the
ratio of villains to heroes really
wouldn't change
walter white
joffrey baratheon gilderoy lockhart
even nate shelley from ted lasso
arguably one of the more realistic
portrayals of npd in popular media is
still a sort of villain
it's simply how we as a culture
conceptualize this disorder
in the popular consciousness
narcissists are villains
by and large they're portrayed as evil
manipulative scheming
and incredibly into themselves
lately the popular literature on
narcissism has taken an ugly turn with
the rise of narcissistic abuse
literature
here are some titles and as i go through
these keep in mind that these are
supposed to be mental health resources
describing a mental illness
first there's becoming the narcissist
nightmare how to devalue and discard the
narcissist while supplying yourself
this book has four and a half stars on
amazon.com with over 2 000 reviews
it's also one of the top 10 books in the
personality disorders category in the
amazon kindle store
next we have how to kill a narcissist
note the inflammatory language used in
these titles they're designed to capture
a reader in a certain kind of embattled
mindset in which it feels as though
there's a contest for the right to
survive and thrive
this is actually a common feeling that
individuals experience when they're in a
relationship with someone who has
borderline or narcissistic personality
disorder
however the answer isn't to fuel that
feeling and exploit it for book sales
such an approach only feeds into a
problematic and ultimately dehumanizing
perspective
at any rate like any lurid headline
designed to appeal to our most basic
survival instincts books like these sell
even if they keep people trapped in a me
versus the narcissist mindset
[Music]
next there's gaslighting the
narcissist's favorite tool of
manipulation
which is currently number two in the
personality disorders category on amazon
and finally my personal favorite
exorcism purging the narcissist from
heart and soul
and the cover on this one looks more
like a gothic horror novel than a book
about mental health
this is where we are at with respect to
the popular literature on narcissism
this book by the way also has four and a
half stars on amazon
now there are of course other titles
that are less inflammatory and that
attempt to help people increase their
understanding and compassion for both
themselves and the narcissist in their
lives
a tone that seems much more befitting
the topic of mental health and dealing
with mental illness
in the last 10 or so years popular
narcissism has become a legitimate
cultural phenomenon
now these are the current 50 bestsellers
in the amazon.com personality disorders
category
some of the titles i just showed you are
sitting on this list
in fact 19 of the top 50 titles on
personality disorders are about
narcissism that's 38
nearly four times the number we would
expect if all personality disorders
received equal attention
basically a lot of people are reading
about narcissism but most of them are
reading titles that stigmatize this
disorder and portray narcissists as evil
villains
and it's not just books
there are an increasing number of
youtube videos and facebook communities
that are dedicated to the narcissist as
villain paradigm now you might be
thinking
okay
so maybe narcissists are getting
portrayed as villains
well aren't they i mean where's the
mistake
and if you only went by the dsm-5
description for narcissistic personality
disorder
you'd be right take a look at the dsm
diagnostic criteria for npd
grandiosity entitlement arrogance
exploitation
lack of empathy
the official description of npd
fits the characters i showed you earlier
to a t
but here's the big question
is this a description of mental illness
notice there's no mention of suffering
no emotional distress no internal
conflict only entitlement manipulation
grandiosity
truly
this is a person who would be easy to
hate
but is this really what narcissism is in
the may 2015 edition of the american
journal of psychiatry the authors
conclude that the dsm-5 definition of
narcissism provides a narrow
and homogeneous definition of
narcissistic personality disorder
that it doesn't describe the variety of
individuals who present with
narcissistic issues and that it
completely ignores core features of the
disorder like vulnerable self-esteem
feelings of inferiority emptiness and
perhaps most importantly distress
and this wasn't the first article in a
peer-reviewed journal that pointed out
how inadequate the dsm definition of
narcissism actually is people have been
writing about this for over 30 years
in fact when the american psychiatric
association was writing the dsm-5
they almost threw npd out altogether
because the current diagnostic
description is so problematic
they decided to keep it
but they also put together a work group
to come up with an alternative
here's what they came up with their
alternative definition starts off by
mentioning impairment
so already
we're heads and shoulders above the
current criteria that make no mention of
impairment conflict or distress
they define npd as impairment across at
least two of the following four
areas of personality functioning
identity
self-direction
empathy
and intimacy
for identity
they say that narcissists have an
unstable identity based on the reactions
of other people and that their
self-esteem bounces around between
extremes of high and low for
self-direction
narcissists are stuck chasing other
people's approval
they have trouble setting their own
goals and they tend to see themselves
through an extreme lens
where they're either exceptional or
worthless it also says that they are
often unaware of their own motivations
which sort of kills the idea that
narcissists are mustache twirling
villains for empathy narcissists have
trouble recognizing how other people
feel because they tend to be very
focused on whether other people approve
of them
this leads them to overestimate or
underestimate how important they are to
other people
now on the one hand that sets the stage
for arrogance
but on the other hand
if you chronically underestimate how
important you are to other people
it sets the stage for depression
and finally intimacy
narcissists have trouble forming deep
connections and bonds with other people
because they're so focused on their own
self-worth
so we've covered how the dsm-5
definition of narcissism is too narrow
how it misses important features of the
disorder like vulnerable self-esteem and
impairments into stress tolerance
how it fails to address underlying
psychological structures that produce
symptoms and how it leaves out any
mention of distress
but there's even more
here are some other problems with the
dsm-5 description of npd
npd was first added as an official
diagnosis to the dsm-3 in 1980
at the time the diagnosis had a broader
more inclusive criteria that was heavily
influenced by psychoanalytic theories
concerning narcissism
the american psychiatric association
removed all reference to dynamic
conflict and emotional distress for npd
when they published the revised version
of the dsm-3 in 1987 because they
thought that the original npd
description was too heavily influenced
by psychoanalytic theory
but they were overzealous
they ended up stripping away everything
that grounded the disorder as an actual
mental illness
and the data support that conclusion
recent studies have looked at the
reliability and validity of the dsm
definition of npd
and they've found that it has low
temporal stability
meaning that when you assess someone one
day and diagnose them with npd they may
not meet the same criteria in a month or
a year
and that's a big problem when it comes
to personality disorders because they're
supposed to be stable over time meaning
they don't easily change
as described in the dsm npd is not
stable because it is little more than a
collection of surface level traits it
doesn't address underlying psychological
structures that produce those traits npd
also has extremely low prevalence rates
some studies have found less than one
percent of people meet the descriptive
criteria for it
it is actually the least diagnosed of
all personality disorders
even though it's over represented in
popular media and on amazon hardly
anyone in the real world qualifies for
the disorder as it is currently
described in the dsm finally it has low
clinical utility
as a construct npd simply isn't very
useful
narcissists in a grandiose state
don't seek treatment
and the dsm makes it impossible to
diagnose a narcissist who is not in a
grandiose state something we'll discuss
later
as a result most therapists outside of
certain settings like prisons simply do
not diagnose people with npd
so we have a diagnosis that doesn't
describe a person who is mentally ill
that doesn't hold up consistently over
time
that is exceedingly rare in the general
population and that therapists don't
ever use except in very limited settings
like prison how did this happen most of
what we know about narcissism we know
from research using one instrument
the npi
the npi was made using the dsm
description for narcissism
and 77 percent of all research done on
narcissism since the 1980s has used it
all versions of the npi focus only on
grandiose narcissism in other words the
version of narcissism that is
exceedingly rare and doesn't include any
emotional suffering or distress
increasingly researchers agree that the
npi does not actually measure mental
illness
instead it measures traits that are
arguably adaptive in the right settings
here's a description from the team that
developed the test
according to them the npi identifies
people who are energetic extroverted and
experience seeking
grandiose in their conception of
themselves and that others often see
them as egotistical and conceited the
npi
the main instrument used to research
narcissism
doesn't describe mental illness
it describes steve jobs or any number of
highly successful business leaders
was steve jobs narcissistic
probably
did he have a personality disorder
i don't know maybe
but he was also an effective leader and
a visionary who changed the world
and this is the issue with the npi and
arguably the last 30 odd years of
narcissism research that uses it
npi scores are rarely associated with
other hallmarks of serious mental
illness and distress
and that's why we tend to think of
narcissists as not really mentally ill
in short
the last 30 odd years of research into
narcissism using the npi
may be fatally flawed
which means that we may know next to
nothing about narcissism